Add formal two-part definition of Gaussian linear regression and align cross-text terminology (#530)
d-morrison/rme: _subfiles/Linear-models-overview/_sec_linreg_understanding.qmd

## General form of a Gaussian linear regression model {.smaller}

:::{#def-lm-general-form}
#### General form of a Gaussian linear regression model

A Gaussian linear regression model has two components:

1. The **random part**
(the **outcome distribution model**):

Here $\vx_i$ is the observed covariate vector for unit $i$.
Here $\sciid$ means
conditionally independent and identically distributed.

$$
Y_i|\vx_i \sciid \Normal(\mu_i,\sigma^2)
$$

2. The **systematic part**
(the **linear predictor component**):

$$
\eta_i \eqdef \mu_i \quad \text{(identity link)}
= \beta_0 + \beta_1 x_{i1} + \cdots + \beta_p x_{ip}
= \tp{(\vx_i)} \vb
$$

Here $p$ is the number of covariates
excluding the intercept.
The vector $\vx_i$ includes an intercept entry equal to 1,
so $\vx_i$ has length $p+1$.

Terminology varies across texts.
@dobson4e usually emphasizes the conditional outcome distribution and its mean structure.
@vittinghoff2e often uses the name **linear predictor**
for $\eta_i$.
@dunn2018generalized uses the labels
**random component**
and

> **systematic component**

Reviewer: Vittinghoff uses "random part" and "systematic part" (find example page numbers in Ch 4)

also provide example page numbers for Dobson and for Dunn

## General form of a Gaussian linear regression model {.smaller}

:::{#def-lm-general-form}
#### General form of a Gaussian linear regression model

A Gaussian linear regression model has two components:

1. The **random part**
(the **outcome distribution model**):

Here $\vx_i$ is the observed covariate vector for unit $i$.
Here $\sciid$ means
conditionally independent and identically distributed.

$$

> Y_i|\vx_i \sciid \Normal(\mu_i,\sigma^2)

Reviewer: \sciid means they are both conditionally independently distributed and conditionally identically distributed; how can we clarify this phrasing? see also the discussion of these concepts in the probability chapter, and suggest corrections and clarifications

$$

2. The **systematic part**
(the **linear predictor component**):

$$
\eta_i \eqdef \mu_i \quad \text{(identity link)}
= \beta_0 + \beta_1 x_{i1} + \cdots + \beta_p x_{ip}
= \tp{(\vx_i)} \vb

> $$

Reviewer: let's define `\vb` explicitly

Here $p$ is the number of covariates
excluding the intercept.
The vector $\vx_i$ includes an intercept entry equal to 1,
so $\vx_i$ has length $p+1$.

Terminology varies across texts.
@dobson4e uses this two-part formulation explicitly

> (probability distribution + mean/link equation;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(probability distribution + mean/link equation/linear component;
```

> see p. 36).

Reviewer: do this and move the page reference into a notes block.

## General form of a Gaussian linear regression model {.smaller}

:::{#def-lm-general-form}
#### General form of a Gaussian linear regression model

A Gaussian linear regression model has two components:

1. The **random part**
(the **outcome distribution model**):

$$
Y_i|\vx_i \simind \Normal(\mu_i,\sigma^2)
$$

::: notes
Here $\vx_i$ is the observed covariate vector for unit $i$.
Here $\simind$ means independently distributed.
Conditional on $\vx_1,\ldots,\vx_n$,
the responses are independent across units,
and each $Y_i|\vx_i$ follows the same conditional distributional form
with common variance $\sigma^2$

> while allowing $\mu_i$ to vary with $\vx_i$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
while allowing $\mu_i$ to vary by observation
```

:::

2. The **systematic part**
(the **linear predictor component**):

$$
\ba
\mu_i 

> &= \tp{(\vx_i)} \vb 

Reviewer: use dot product

Here $\sciid$ means
conditionally independent
and conditionally identically distributed.
conditional on $\vx_1,\ldots,\vx_n$,
the responses are independent across units,
and each $Y_i|\vx_i$ follows the same conditional distributional form
with common variance $\sigma^2$
while allowing $\mu_i$ to vary with $\vx_i$.

$$
Y_i|\vx_i \sciid \Normal(\mu_i,\sigma^2)
$$

2. The **systematic part**
(the **linear predictor component**):

$$
\eta_i \eqdef \mu_i \quad \text{(identity link)}
= \beta_0 + \beta_1 x_{i1} + \cdots + \beta_p x_{ip}
= \tp{(\vx_i)} \vb
$$

Here $\vb \eqdef (\beta_0,\beta_1,\ldots,\beta_p)$
is the coefficient vector.

Here $p$ is the number of covariates
excluding the intercept.
The vector $\vx_i$ includes an intercept entry equal to 1,
so $\vx_i$ has length $p+1$.

Terminology varies across texts.
@dobson4e uses this two-part formulation explicitly
(probability distribution
+
mean/link equation/linear component).

::: notes
See [@dobson4e, p. 36].
:::
In Chapter 4,
@vittinghoff2e uses the labels
**systematic part**
and
**random part**
(see pp. 72-73).
@dunn2018generalized uses the labels
**random component**
and

> **systematic component**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
@vittinghoff2e [e.g., pp. 72-73]
uses the labels
**systematic part**
and
**random part**.
@dunn2018generalized [e.g., p. 11] 
uses the labels
**random component**
and
**systematic component**
```

A Gaussian linear regression model has two components:

1. The **random part**
    
    (the **outcome distribution model**):

    $$
    Y_i|\vx_i \simind \Normal(\mu_i,\sigma^2)
    $$

    Here $\vx_i$ is the observed covariate vector for unit $i$.
    Here $\simind$ means independently distributed.
    Conditional on $\vx_1,\ldots,\vx_n$,
    the responses are independent across units,
    and each $Y_i|\vx_i$ follows the same conditional distributional form
    with common variance $\sigma^2$
    while allowing $\mu_i$ to vary by observation.

2. The **systematic part**
    
    (the **linear predictor component**):

    $$
    \ba
    \mu_i 
    &= \iprod{\vb}{\vx_i}
    \\
    &= \beta_0 + \beta_1 x_{i1} + \cdots + \beta_p x_{ip}
    \ea
    $$

    Here $\vb \eqdef (\beta_0,\beta_1,\ldots,\beta_p)$
    is the coefficient vector.

    Here $p$ is the number of covariates
    excluding the intercept.
    The vector $\vx_i$ includes an intercept entry equal to 1,
    so $\vx_i$ has length $p+1$.

Terminology varies across texts.

> @dobson4e uses this two-part formulation explicitly

Reviewer: cite the page number where they first use these terms

so $\vx_i$ has length $p+1$.

Terminology varies across texts.
@dobson4e uses this two-part formulation explicitly
(probability distribution + mean/link equation;
see p. 36).
In Chapter 4,
@vittinghoff2e uses the labels
**systematic part**
and
**random part**

> (see pp. 73-74).

Reviewer: 72-73?

@dunn2018generalized uses the labels
**random component**
and
**systematic component**

> (see p. 27)

Reviewer: page 11 is better for Dunn? find where each text first introduces their terminology

uses the labels
**random component**
and
**systematic component**.

::: notes
See [@dobson4e, p. 36].
:::

> :::

Reviewer: put all this in a notes div
